---
layout: blog-post
title: "Support AB 2109 :: Josh D Miller :: joshdmiller.com"
posttitle: Support AB 2109
tags:
    - science
    - society
---

[AB 2109][ab] is a bill introduced in the California State Assembly to increase child
vaccination rates. It would require the existing philosophical exemption to be
accompanied by a physician-signed form indicating that the physician has
supplied the parent with "information regarding the benefits and risks of the
immunization and the health risks of specified communicable diseases".

Why is this important? As it exists, any parent can exempt their child from
public school vaccination requirements by simply signing a form indicating a
philosophical objection to vaccination. Considering both the public health
risks of decreasing vaccination rates and the proven safety and efficacy
profile of vaccinations, why should it be harder to have a child vaccinated
than to exempt her?

The law simply requires informed consent on behalf of the parent through a
visit with a qualified health care professional, which visit is almost surely
covered by either their private insurance or Medicaid/Medi-Cal benefits.

Solid coverage of the bill can be found in [this article][article] by Dr. David
Gorski at the wonderful [Science-Based Medicine][sbm] blog and the full text of
the bill is attached.

I ask my friends in California to join me in writing a letter to our state
assembly and senate representatives as well as to Governor Brown asking for
their support for this important cause.

[article]: http://bit.ly/HlCRQT
[sbm]: http://bit.ly/GY9pfT
[ab]: http://1.usa.gov/HlFLBx

