---
layout: blog-post
title: "I Met an Interesting Man :: Josh D Miller :: joshdmiller.com"
posttitle: I Met an Interesting Man
tags:
    - science
    - skepticism
    - society
    - fun
---

Over the weekend, I spent some time with some close friends at a local sandwich
shop - laughing, debating, drinking copious amounts of fountain beverages, and,
of course, eating. Our conversations are always boisterous and vociferous and
usually move pretty quickly from topic to topic with no apparent order or logic.
At some point that afternoon, we found ourselves mocking a creationist argument
we heard about chemical laws.

A man in his late fifties approached the table and interrupted. He seemed like a
shy man - despite his approach - and was wearing simply a white tee shirt and
jeans with black dress shoes and a tan belt like one sees on a rancher. He said
he couldn't help but overhear our conversation - which no doubt was true - and
wanted to know if he could ask a question since we were talking about molecules.
To avoid being rude, we agreed and he asked: "if atoms are always moving and can
never stop, how does that not violate the second law of thermodynamics?" I gave
a quick response demonstrating why his question made no sense, to which he said
he already had an answer dealing with quantum physics. I cannot remember his
reason precisely and it matters very little here, but after smiling and thanking
us for allowing the interruption, he went back to his table and we resumed our
conversation.

Fifteen or twenty minutes later, the conversation at our table had turned to
eugenics and genetic engineering and into a rousing debate on the ethical sticky
wickets of such research. At that point, the man returned and asked if he could
join us.

And that's when things got interesting.

<!-- more -->

He started with "they're already doing that right now."

"Doing what?" A friend asked.

"Genetic engineering." He said.

"Who is?" I asked.

"The federal government," came the predictable response. He proceeded to explain
that since the 1960s, "they" have been manipulating human genetics to create
a team of "super soldiers" who are fiercely intelligent and can move objects
with their minds.

"Didn't I see that on [The X-Files](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_X-Files)
once?" I asked somewhat sardonically. He laughed at my joke and continued to
explain. He informed us that he knew some of these people personally. In fact,
he knew the guy who killed [Kim Jong-il](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kim_Jong-il). 
All of us looked around a little puzzled as he explained how it happened. "They"
showed the man a picture of just Kim's eyes, from which he was able to reach in
with his mind and "give Kim Jong-il a heart attack - while he was on a moving
train!"

It was at this point that several of us expressed our skepticism aloud. I
believe the phrase "physically impossible" was uttered a few times. This led us
into a rousing and - suprisingly - quite enjoyable debate on many aspects of the
paranormal.

The man was polite, kind, entertaining, and completely serious. We spoke as a
group for more than two hours, over the course of which he told many stories of
varied aspects of the paranormal, including:

- the government leveraged out-of-body experiences to spy on the Soviet Union
  during the Cold War by "flying over" military installations and the like;
- psychic premonitions that occurred during dreams, specific instances of which
  include his prediction of a friend's violent encounter overseas and the
  destruction of the Space Shuttle _Challenger_;
- invasive thoughts of dead children that helped him save the life of a neighbor
  child;

A friend argued confirmation bias and cognitive dissonance while I argued that
anecdotes shouldn't change people's minds when we can study these things
objectively. As an example, I said something about alternative medicine and
anecdotal evidence, in response to which he forcefully asserted that he fully
accepted alternative medicine. I should have known better. He said that he had
personally cured cancer with alternative medicine - in friends both human and
canine. 

For those not familiar with me personally, I should note that I am fervent
advocate of science-based medicine: any treatment modality with a plausible
mechanism of action that can be demonstrated safe and effective through clinical
trials is "medicine" - everything else is not. As this is a strong interest of
mine, I warned him in advance that I read about this topic four or five times
per week.

I offered as a good example of the differences between science-based and
fantasy-based evidence [Stanislaw Burzynski](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stanislaw_Burzynski),
a crank down in Texas. Immediately, the stranger was able to drop the phrase
"[antineoplastons](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antineoplaston)", a
name coined by Burzynski for a group of peptides he claims, without evidence,
cures cancers that would otherwise be terminal. I was a greatly surprised at the
man's broad base of knowledge - a venerable encyclopedia of conspiracy theories
and pseudosciences without the requisite level of skepticism.

And that really sums this all up. Nothing he believed was really new to me (with
the exception of the psychic assassins); everything he believed had been
believed by other people that I've met and debated. But he was the only person
I'd ever met who believed all of it. He was in many ways the generalization of
the crazed conspiracy theorist - "they" were doing diabolical things and "their"
technology was far more sophisticated, the media lies to cover things up, all
medical professionals are in the pockets of pharmaceutical companies, and there
is much more than meets the eye in everyday scenarios. 

But he did not meet the stereotype in an interesting and important way - he did
not sound crazy. Yes, his beliefs were pretty strange, but he wasn't crazy. He
was a guy with views that are sometimes in conflict with the majority and he had
an opportunity to debate them openly with someone else. 

And I guess that's why I sympathized with him. He knew his beliefs were out
there. He knew we'd disagree. But he wanted the discussion nonetheless. He
wasn't in our face, he didn't raise his voice, and he was neither rude nor
dismissive. He was courteous and receptive to courtesy. And I respect that. And
despite disagreeing on virtually everything, the conversation was still
enlightening, interesting, and entertaining.

In short, it was fun.

